I prithee, pretty youth
let me be better acquainted withthee.
They say you are a melancholyfellow.
I am so.
I do love it better thanlaughing.
Those that are in extremity ofeither are abominable fellows
and betray themselves to everymodern censure
worse than drunkards.
Why, 'tis good to be sad and saynothing.
Why then, 'tis good to be apost.
I have neither the scholar'smelancholy,
which is emulation;
nor the musician's, which isfantastical;
nor the courtier's, which isproud;
nor the soldier's, which isambitious;
nor the lawyer's, which ispolitic;
nor the lady's, which is nice;
nor the lover's, which is allthese;
but it is a melancholy of mineown,
compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects,
and, indeed, the sundrycontemplation of my travels,
in which my often rumination
wraps me in a most humoroussadness.
A traveller.
By my faith, you have greatreason to be sad.
I fear you have sold your ownlands
to see other men's.
Then, to have seen much and tohave nothing,
is to have rich eyes and poorhands.
Yes, I have gained myexperience.
And your experience makes yousad.
I'd rather have a fool to makeme merry
than experience to make me sad--
and to travel for it too--
Good day and happiness, dearRosalind.
Nay, then, God by you, and youtalk in blank verse.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller.
Look you, lisp and wear strangesuits,
disable all the benefits of yourown country,
be out of love with yournativity,
and almost chide God for makingyou
that countenance you are,
or I will scarce think you haveswam in a gondola.
How now, Orlando.
Where have you been all thiswhile?
You, a lover,
and you serve me such anothertrick,
never come in my sight more.
My fair Rosalind,
I come within an hour of mypromise.
Break an hour's promise in love?
He that will divide a minuteinto a thousand parts
and break but a part
of the thousandth part of aminute in the affairs of love,
it may be said of him
that Cupid hath clapped him o'erthe shoulder,
but I'll warrant himheart-whole.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
Nay, and you be so tardy,
come no more in my sight.
I had as lief be wooed of asnail.
Of a snail?
Ay, of a snail,
for though he comes slowly,
he carries his house on hishead--
a better jointure, I think,
than you make a woman.
Besides, he carries his destinywith him.
What's that?
Why, horns, which such as you
are fain to be beholding to yourwives for.
Virtue is no horn maker,
and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And I am your Rosalind.
It pleases him to call you so.
He hath a Rosalind of a betterleer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me,
for now I am in a holiday humorand like enough to consent.
What would you say to me now,
an I were your very, veryRosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better to speakfirst,
and when you were gravelled forlack of matter,
then you might take occasion tokiss.
Very good orators, when they areout, they spit,
and for lovers lacking-- Godwarn us--matter,
the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty,and there begins new matter.
What, of my suit?
Not out of your apparel, and yetout of your suit.
Am not I your Rosalind?
I take some joy to say you are,
because I would be talking ofher.
Well then, in her person,
I say I will not have you.
Then, in mine own person, I die.
No, faith, die by attorney.
The poor world is almost 6,000years old,
and in all that time,
there was not any man died inhis own person,
videlicet, in a love-cause.
Troilus had his brains dashedout with a Grecian club,
although he did what he could todie before,
and he is one of the verypatterns of love.
Leander, he would have lived formany a fair year,
though Hero had turned nun,
had it not been for a hotmidsummer night,
for, good youth, he went butforth
to wash him in the Hellespont
and there being taken of a crampwas drowned,
and the foolish chronicles ofthat age
did find it "Hero of Sestos."
But these are all lies.
Men have died from time to time,
and worms have eaten them, butnot for love.
I would not have my rightRosalind of this mind,
for, I protest, her frown mightkill me.
By this hand, it will not kill afly.
But come,
now I will be your Rosalind
in a more coming-on disposition,
and ask me what you will.
I will grant it.
Then love me, Rosalind.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays andSaturdays and all.
And wilt thou have me?
Aye, and 20 such.
What sayest thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why, can one desire too much ofa good thing?
Come, sister, you must be thepriest and marry us.
Give me your hand, Orlando.
Well, sister, what do you say?
Pray thee, marry us.
Well, I cannot say the words.
You must begin, "Will you,Orlando"--
Go to.
Will you, Orlando, have to wifethis Rosalind?
I will.
Aye, but when?
Why now; as fast as she canmarry us.
Why, then, you must say,
"'I take thee, Rosalind, forwife."
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
I might ask you for yourcommission,
but I do take thee, Orlando, formy husband.
Oh.
There's a girl goes before thepriest,
and certainly a woman's thoughtruns before her actions.
So do all thoughts.
They are winged.
How long would you have herafter you have possessed her?
Forever and a day.
Say the "day" without the"ever."
No, no,
Orlando, men are April when theywoo,
December when they wed.
Maids are May when they aremaids,
but the sky changes when theyare wives.
I will be more jealous of thee
than a Barbary cock-pigeon overhis hen,
more clamorous than a parrotagainst rain,
more new-fangled than an ape,
more giddy in my desires than amonkey.
I will weep for nothing, likeDiana in the fountain,
and I will do that when you aredisposed to be merry.
I will laugh like a hyena,
and that when you are inclinedto sleep.
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
O, but she is wise.
Else she would not have the witto do this.
The wiser, the waywarder.
Make the doors upon a woman'swit,
and it will out at the casement.
Shut that, 'twill out throughthe keyhole.
Stop that,
'twill fly with the smoke out ofthe chimney.
For these two hours, Rosalind, Iwill leave thee.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lackthee two hours.
I must attend the duke atdinner.
By two o'clock, I will be withthee again.
Well...
go your ways, go your ways.
I knew what you would prove.
My friends told me as such, andI-I-I thought no less:
'Twas that flattering tongue ofyours won me.
Well, 'tis but one cast off, andso, come, death!
Two o'clock is your hour?
Aye, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and so God mend me,
and by all pretty oaths that arenot dangerous,
if you break one jot of yourpromise
or come one minute behind yourhour,
I will think you the mostpathetical break-promise,
the most hollow lover,
and the most unworthy of her youthat call Rosalind
that may be chosen out of thegross band of the unfaithful,
and so, beware my censure,
and keep your promise.
With no less religion
than if thou wert indeed myRosalind.
So, adieu.
Well, Time is the old justicethat examines all suchoffenders,
and let Time try. Adieu.
You have simply misused our sexin your love-prate.
We must have your doublet andhose
plucked over your head
to show the world what the birdhath done to her own nest.
O coz, coz, coz,
my pretty little coz,
if thou didst know
how many fathom deep I am inlove.
But it cannot be sounded.
My affection hath an unknownbottom,
like the bay of Portugal.
Or rather, bottomless,
for as fast as you pouraffection in,
it runs out.
No, that same wicked bastard ofVenus
that was begot of thought,
conceived of spleen, and born ofmadness,
that blind rascally boy
that abuses every one's eyesbecause his own are out,
let him be judge how deep I amin love.
Oh...
I tell thee, Aliena,
I cannot be out of the sight ofOrlando.
I'll go find a shadow and sighuntil he come.
And I'll sleep.
Which is he that killed thedeer?
Sir, it was I.
Let's present him to the duke,like a Roman conqueror,
and it would do well
to set the deer's horns upon hishead
for a branch of victory.
Have you no song, forester, forthis purpose?
Yes, sir.
Sing it!
'Tis no matter how it be in tune
so it make noise enough.
What shall he have that kill'dthe deer?
His leather skin and horns towear.
Then sing him home.
Take thou no scorn to wear thehorn;
It was a crest ere thou wastborn.
Thy father's father wore it,
and thy father bore it.
The horn, the horn, the lustyhorn
is not a thing to laugh toscorn.
How say you now?
Is it not past two o'clock?
And here much Orlando.
I warrant you,
with pure love and with troubledbrain,
he hath ta'en his bow and arrowsand is gone forth to sleep.
My errand is to you, fair youth;
My gentle Phebe did bid me giveyou this.
I know not the contents, but, asI guess
by the stern brow and waspishaction
that she did use as she waswriting of it,
it bears an angry tenor.
pardon me:
I am but as a guiltlessmessenger.
Patience herself would startleat this letter
and play the swaggerer.
Bear this, bear all.
She says I am not fair, that Ilack manners.
She calls me proud and that shecould not love me
were man as rare as phoenix.
'Od's my will.
Her love is not the hare that Ido hunt.
Why writes she this to me?
Well, shepherd, well,
this is a letter of your owndevice.
No, I protest, I know not thecontents.
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool
and turn'd into the extremity oflove.
I saw her hand.
She has a leathern hand,
a freestone-color'd hand.
I verily did think that her oldgloves were on,
but 'twas her hands.
She has a huswife's hand; but'tis no matter.
I say she never did invent thisletter.
this is a man's invention andhis hand.
Sure, it is hers.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and acruel style.
A style for challengers.
Why, she defies me as Turk toChristian.
Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heardit yet,
yet heard too much of Phebe'scruelty.
She Phebes me.
Mark how the tyrant writes.
"Art thou god to shepherdturn'd,
that a maiden's heart hathburn'd?"
Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
"Why, thy godhead laid apart,
warr'st thou with a woman'sheart?"
Did you ever hear such railing?
"Whiles the eye of man did woome,
"that could do no vengeance tome.
"Whiles you chid me, I did love.
"How then might your prayersmove?
"He that brings this love tothee
"little knows this love in me,
"and by him, seal up thy mind
"whether that thy youth and kind
"will the faithful offer take ofme
"and all that I can make,
"or else by him, my love deny,
and then I'll study how to die."
Call you this chiding?
Alas, poor shepherd.
Do you pity him?
No, he deserves no pity.
Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make of thee aninstrument
and play false strains uponthee?
Not to be endured.
Well, go thy ways to her,
for I see love hath made thee atame snake,
and say this to her.
If she love me, I charge her tolove thee.
If she will not, I will neverhave her
unless thou entreat for her.
If you be a true lover, hence,
and not a word,
for here comes more company.
Good morrow, fair ones.
Pray you, if you know,
where in the purlieus of thisforest
stands a sheep-cote fenced aboutwith olive trees?
West of this place, down in theneighbour bottom.
A rank of osiers by themurmuring stream
left on your right hand bringsyou to the place.
But at this hour the house dothkeep itself.
There is none within.
If that an eye may profit by atongue,
then should I know you bydescription.
Such garments and such years--
"The boy is fair, of femalefavor,
"and bestows himself like a ripesister;
the woman low and browner thanher brother."
Are not you the owner of thehouse I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being ask'd, tosay we are.
Orlando doth commend him to youboth,
and to that youth he calls hisRosalind
he sends this bloody napkin.
Are you he?
I am.
What must we understand by this?
Some of my shame.
If you will know of me what manI am
and how and where and why thishandkercher was stain'd.
I pray you, tell it.
When last the young Orlandoparted from you,
he left a promise to returnagain within an hour,
and pacing through the forest,
chewing the food of sweet andbitter fancy,
lo, what befell.
He threw his eye aside,
and mark what object did presentitself.
Under an oak whose boughs weremoss'd with age
and high top bald with dryantiquity,
A wretched ragged man o'ergrownwith hair
lay sleeping on his back.
About his neck,
a green and gilded snake hadwreathed itself
who with her head nimble inthreats
approach'd the opening of hismouth,
but suddenly, seeing Orlando, itunlink'd itself
and with indented glides didslip away into a bush,
under which bush's shade,
a lioness with udders all drawndry lay couching,
head on ground with catlikewatch,
when that the sleeping manshould stir,
for 'tis the royal dispositionof that beast
to prey on nothing that dothseem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approachthe man
and found it was his brother,his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak ofthat same brother,
and he did render him the mostunnatural amongst men.
And well he might so do,
for well I know he wasunnatural.
But to Orlando, did he leave himthere,
food to the suck'd and hungrylioness?
Twice did he turn his back andpurposed so,
but kindness, nobler ever thanrevenge,
and nature, stronger than hisjust occasion,
made him give battle to thelioness,
who quickly fell before him
in which hurtling from miserableslumber,
I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Wast you he rescued?
Was't you that did so oftcontrive to kill him?
'Twas I, but 'tis not I.
I do not shame to tell you whatI was,
since my conversion so sweetlytastes,
being the thing I am.
But, for the bloody napkin?
By and by.
When from the first and last,betwixt us two,
tears our recountments had mostkindly bathed
as how I came into that desertplace--
in brief, he led me to thegentle duke,
who gave me fresh array andentertainment,
committing me unto my brother'slove,
who led me instantly unto hiscave,
there stripp'd himself,
and here, upon his arm,
the lioness had torn some fleshaway,
which all this while had bled,
and now he fainted
and cried, in fainting, uponRosalind.
Brief, I recover'd him, bound uphis wound,
and, after some small space,being strong at heart,
he sent me hither, stranger as Iam,
to tell this story
that you might excuse his brokenpromise
and to give this napkin dyed inhis blood
unto that shepherd youth that hein sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why, how now, Ganymede,
sweet Ganymede.
Many will swoon when they dolook on blood.
There is more in it.
Cousin Ganymede.
Look, he recovers.
Oh.
Would I were at home.
We'll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him bythe arm?
Be of good cheer.
Wert you a man, you lack a man'sheart.
I do so, I confess it.
Ah, ah, ha, ha, sirrah,
a body would think this was wellcounterfeited.
I pray you, tell your brotherhow well I counterfeited.
Ah!
This was not a counterfeit.
There is too great testimony inyour complexion
that it was a passion ofearnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart andcounterfeit to be a man.
Oh.
So I do,
but, in faith,
I should have been a woman byright.
Come, you look paler and paler.
I pray you, draw homeward.
Good sir, go with us.
Will you go?